Vignettes for finalsize (#93)
epiverse-trace/finalsize: vignettes/uncertainty_params.Rmd

---
title: "Modelling uncertainty in R₀"
output:
  bookdown::html_vignette2:
    fig_caption: yes
    code_folding: show
pkgdown:
  as_is: true
bibliography: references.bib
link-citations: true
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Modelling uncertainty in R₀}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
editor_options: 
  chunk_output_type: console
---

> Epidemic final size calculations are sensitive to input data such as the $R_0$ of the infection. This can often be uncertain in the early stages of an outbrak. This uncertainty can be included in final size calculations by running `final_size` for values drawn from a distribution, and summarising the outcomes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Epidemic final size calculations are sensitive to input data such as the $R_0$ of the infection. Such values can often be uncertain in the early stages of an outbreak. This uncertainty can be included in final size calculations by running `final_size` for values drawn from a distribution, and summarising the outcomes.
```

Author: Fixed offline

::: {.alert .alert-warning}
**New to _finalsize_?** It may help to read earlier vignettes first!
:::

::: {.alert .alert-primary}
## Use case {-}

> The infection **parameter ($R_0$) is uncertain**. You want to know how much variation this could cause in the estimated final size of the epidemic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The infection **parameter ($R_0$) is uncertain**. We want to know this uncertainty could influence our estimates for the final size of the epidemic.
```

:::

::: {.alert .alert-secondary}

> ### What you have {-}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### What we have {-}
```

Author: Fixed offline

  1. In addition to the $R_0$, demography data, social contact data, and data on the distribution of susceptibility among age groups;
  2. A measure of the error in the estimated $R_0$ of the infection.

### What you assume {-}

>   1. An SIR epidemic, and the complete partitioning of individuals into demographic and risk groups.

Author: Fixed offline

# load useful packages
library(data.table)
library(ggplot2)
```

## Getting $R_0$, contact and demography data, and susceptibility

This example uses social contact data from the [POLYMOD](https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/502084) project to estimate the final size of an epidemic in the U.K. These data are provided with the `socialmixr` package.

These data are handled just as in the [Basic usage](using_finalsize.html) vignette. This example also considers an infection with an $R_0$ of 2.0.

```{r}
# get UK polymod data
polymod <- socialmixr::polymod
contact_data <- socialmixr::contact_matrix(
  polymod,
  countries = "United Kingdom",
  age.limits = c(0, 5, 18, 40, 65),
  symmetric = TRUE
)

# get the contact matrix and demography data
contact_matrix <- t(contact_data$matrix)
demography_vector <- contact_data$demography$population

# scale the contact matrix so the largest eigenvalue is 1.0
contact_matrix <- contact_matrix / max(eigen(contact_matrix)$values)

# divide each row of the contact matrix by the corresponding demography
contact_matrix <- contact_matrix / demography_vector

n_demo_grps <- length(demography_vector)
```

```{r}
# mean R0 is 2.0
r0_mean <- 2.0
```

> This example considers a scenario in which susceptibility to infection does not vary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simplicitly, this example considers a scenario in which susceptibility to infection does not vary.
```

Author: Fixed offline

This example considers a normal distribution $N(\mu = 2.0, \sigma = 0.1)$, for an $R_0$ of 2.0. You can draw 1,000 $R_0$ samples from this distribution and run `final_size` on the contact data and demography data for each sample.

This is quick, as `finalsize` is an Rcpp package with a C++ backend.

```{r}
# create an R0 samples vector
r0_samples <- rnorm(n = 1000, mean = r0_mean, sd = 0.1)
```

```{r}
# run final size on each sample with the same data
final_size_data <- Map(
  r0_samples, seq_along(r0_samples),
  f = function(r0, i) {
    # the i-th final size estimate
    fs <- final_size(
      r0 = r0,
      contact_matrix = contact_matrix,
      demography_vector = demography_vector,
      susceptibility = susc_uniform,
      p_susceptibility = p_susc_uniform
    )

    fs$replicate <- i
    fs$r0_estimate <- r0
    fs
  }
)

# combine data
final_size_data <- rbindlist(final_size_data)

# order age groups
final_size_data$demo_grp <- factor(
  final_size_data$demo_grp,
  levels = contact_data$demography$age.group
)
```

### Visualise uncertainty in final size

> ```{r class.source = 'fold-hide', class.source = 'fold-hide', fig.cap="Estimated ranges of the final size of a hypothetical SIR epidemic in age groups of the U.K. population, when the $R_0$ is estimated to be 2.0, with a standard deviation around this estimate of 0.1. In this example, relatively low uncertainty in $R_0$ estimates can also leads to uncertainty in the estimated final size of the epidemic. Points represent means, while ranges extend between the 5th and 95th percentiles.", fig.width=5, fig.height=4}

Author: Fixed offline
